Pitch: How Africa’s largest refinery is redefining the continent’s oil economy 


Surprisingly close to Nigeria’s capital, Lagos, the colossal $20 billion Dangote Refinery promises a crude awakening, upending decades of dependence and dysfunction. It is making fuels and petrochemicals from Nigeria’s own crude. Even as the US and Russia compete to squeeze every drop of oil from the ground, the apparent rapid success of Dangote suggests that Africa may not need them. The world is watching carefully as Nigeria moves out of the stereotypical primary producer role and reaps many benefits in doing so. 


This feature will serve C&EN’s aim to focus on Nigeria’s chemical industry. Together, experienced chemist and science writer Andy Extance, and Nigerian journalist Olasunkanmi Arowolo will explore Dangote’s impact. We propose to collaborate on our research and write two separate features for C&EN.  


For decades, Nigeria, Africa’s largest oil producer, paradoxically exported crude only to import refined products at a premium, starving its economy and polluting its politics. After the Dangote refinery opened in 2024, it is already operating at 650,000 barrels-per-day capacity and planning expansion. Nigeria is now exporting valuable gasoline, diesel, and jet fuel, while importing crude from countries like the US. Dangote is an unusually complex refinery, producing a wide range of fuels and petrochemicals, potentially reshaping plastic production in Africa. Nevertheless, it can readily compete with ageing refineries in Europe, the US and the Middle East. Such is its success that another large Nigerian refinery now plans to begin operation in 2029. Andy will explore the chemistry and economic factors involved.  


Meanwhile, owned by the conglomerate of Africa’s richest man, Aliko Dangote, the refinery overturns the tradition of foreign-owned complexes in remote areas of the country. In doing so, it looks set to evade the issues that have seen refinery staff taken hostage. Yet environmental and social challenges remain, with forced evictions made to secure the land. Nigeria still allows gas flaring, a source of emissions that other countries have banned. And it’s hard to see how the country can meet its climate goals while scaling up refining. Ola’ will explore such cultural and governance issues. 

 

Dear Chris, 


I hope you’re well. Hopefully, you will have seen the piece on perovskites I recently wrote for C&EN. I focused on the role China plays there following the freelance meeting from February that you shared. I also recently wrote about the UK’s refineries for Chemistry World. 


I’m also aware that C&EN is interested in Nigeria’s industry, and it hasn’t covered the Dangote refinery at all. I met Ola’ Arowolo, copied in here, at a science communication conference shortly after listening to that call, and his knowledge of the country and contacts there were obviously massively useful. However, he hasn’t written much about science - this would be his first such piece if you commission it. As I don’t know much about Nigeria, we thought we would try to collaborate. The result is the pitch you see above. 


The idea of writing two articles is just one option. We are open to collaborating on one article, but doing two separate articles seemed like an easier option in terms of attribution and payment. But obviously that’s a bigger ask of C&EN. So we’re open to some discussion over how this might work. 


Based on the February call, as this is an unusual pitch with some interdisciplinary elements, you seemed like the best person to pitch, in your editorial strategy role. 


Thanks in advance for any feedback you have, and we look forward to hearing from you soon.

 

Best regards,

Andy Extance